# Intracellular-ELP-Transition-Temperature-Pipeline
This is the R code that I wrote to calculate the intracellular transition temperature of Elastin-like polypeptide (ELP) fusion proteins.
This code was developed as part of my thesis.

ELPs are stimuli responsive proteins that are biocompatible and biodegradable and are constructed out of a pentameric amino acid repeat of (VPGXG)n. In this modular design, the X residue can be selected to alter ELP hydrophobicity, and the number of repeats, n, determines the ELP molecular weight. In response to heat, ELPs can rapidly (within seconds to minutes) phase-separate and self-assemble into protein-rich domains, forming a secondary aqueous phase known as a coacervate. If the ELPs are assembled inside of a cell, these coacervates are typically referred to as microdomains. Individual microdomains are typically several hundred nanometers to several micrometers in diameter. Phase separation is a thermodynamically reversible process, and ELP coacervates quickly resolubilize into bulk water upon cooling.  The temperature of self-assembly, termed the transition temperature (Tt), is directly encoded in the ELP sequence, because it is determined largely by the hydrophobicity of the guest residue and the ELP molecular weight.Importantly, these stimuli responsive characteristics are retained when ELPs are cloned to an effector protein, which allows researchers to create libraries of ELP fusion proteins to control their cellular pathway of interest.  Based on this approach, the MackKay lab has previously reported that thermo-responsive ELP fusion of clathrin light chain can be used to reversibly inhibit clathrin mediated endocytosis.1 More recently, the lab cloned ELPs to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR-ELPs) to control epidermal growth factor signaling, and have also created thermo-responsive fusions of Caveolin 1 and ELPs (CAV1-ELPs) which internalize cholera toxin via the formation of CAV1-ELP microdomains.(2,3)

When intracellular ELP microdomains form, fluorescence becomes concentrated into discrete puncta inside the cell. This pucnta fromation increaes the standard deviation of the pixel values inside the cell, because some areas become dark while others become very bright. Accordingly, by analyzing the pixel value standard deviation from microscope images it should be possible to determine the frame/temeprature at which puncta formation occur.

To analyze the standard deviation data and determine the temperature at which phase transition occurred, I wrote an R function named batch_plot which calculates the baseline standard deviation from the initial <n> images of the temperature ramp (this <n> is specified by the user, but the default is 20); batch_plot then determines the temperature at which the standard deviation shifts above a specified threshold beyond this baseline standard deviation. This threshold is again specified by the user, but the default is 3, reflecting three standard deviations away from the baseline standard deviation (Another suitable threshold could be 2, reflecting two standard deviations away from the baseline, which mimics the 0.05 threshold often used for p-values. Relatedly, users could also select higher thresholds, 5 for example, to account for the increased probability of false positives due to testing multiple cells). The temperature/image slice at which the standard deviation shifts above the specified threshold is recorded as the intracellular Tt. In addition to recording these measurements for each cell, batch_plot also plots the standard deviation data and indicates where on the graph the threshold was passed. The code for batch_plot (batch_plot.Rmd) and some example data (StandardDevData.txt) is provided on this github page.


1)Pastuszka, M. K., Okamoto, C. T., Hamm-Alvarez, S. F. & MacKay, J. A. Flipping the Switch on Clathrin-Mediated Endocytosis using Thermally Responsive Protein Microdomains. Adv Funct Mater 24, 5340-5347, doi:10.1002/adfm.201400715 (2014).
2)Li, Z., Tyrpak, D. R., Park, M., Okamoto, C. T. & MacKay, J. A. A new temperature-dependent strategy to modulate the epidermal growth factor receptor. Biomaterials 183, 319-330, doi:10.1016/j.biomaterials.2018.07.063 (2018).
3)Tyrpak, D. R. et al. Caveolin Elastin-Like Polypeptide Fusions Mediate Temperature-Dependent Assembly of Caveolar Microdomains. Acs Biomater Sci Eng 6, 198-204, doi:10.1021/acsbiomaterials.9b01331 (2020).
